Good afternoon.
This is a general introduction to USB 2.
I have been asked when the
harsh introduction to USB 2 is,
and I'm really hoping that
this is when you don't get,
not when you get to do all of this.
So, which is the bite button?
Okay.
That's the right button.
So, USB 2.
What I'm going to talk
about is what USB 2 is,
as well as what USB 2 is not,
and also what it means to all of you,
and a little bit about how it's done,
and finally, I'll finish up with a little
bit about high-speed ISOC APIs.
So, what is USB 2?
It is USB 2, but it adds high speed.
It is USB 2.
It's compatible with the
USB 1.1 specification.
It includes almost everything
in the USB 1.1 specification.
It's almost exactly like the
USB that you all know and love,
but it adds the high speed.
This is high speed, yeah.
It will transfer data at an orbit
rate of 480 megabits a second.
How fast is 480 megabits, you ask?
Well, it's 40 times faster
than USB 1.1 full speed.
Er, 40 times faster.
So...
How fast is that?
Imagine, I presume you're all going to
be going to our plug fest on
the campus on Thursday evening.
So you're going to go outside,
you're going to go on the bus,
it'll take you about 40
minutes to get to Cupertino's.
If that was a high speed bus though,
it would take you one minute.
So, you can see it's quite a lot faster.
Okay, what USB 2 is not?
USB 2 is not the same
thing as high speed,
and also USB 2 is not...
inefficient.
There's a lot of confusion
out there in the marketplace,
particularly USB 2 and high speed.
USB 2 is not a synonym for high speed.
A USB 2 device can be high speed,
it can be full speed,
it can be low speed.
However, recently there has been some
confusion about USB 2 hosts.
If a computer says that it's USB 2,
you can plug in a high speed
peripheral and you can get 480 megabit
per second communication going.
Okay, so USB 2 includes the full and low
speeds that you're already familiar with.
These can be called classic speed,
although as we already use
classic for other things,
it's not really a word
we'd like you to use.
Also, the USB Implementers Forum,
the governing body of all this,
frowns on you confusing
USB 2 and high speed.
You should not say if you have a full
speed USB 2 peripheral that it's USB 2.
You should say that it's just USB.
If you were to say that,
say you had a printer,
and you said on the box that it is USB 2,
the user will have an
expectation that they plug it in,
and it will run faster than
a previous USB printer.
It won't.
The user will be upset.
You'll get support calls.
So, don't do that sort of thing.
It's leased all sorts of marketing
tricks we'd really like you to not do.
Also, USB 2 is not inefficient.
There's also some confusion
about this out there.
USB 2,
the high speed and the full and low
speed communications are segregated.
They never share the same bus.
So, the full and low speed communications
don't get in the way of the
high speed communications.
There is a theory out there that
if you plug a single USB 1.1
device into a USB 2 system,
every high-speed device
on the system slows down.
This is not true.
It is absolutely not true at all.
We try and dispel myths like that.
There is also some performance
tweaks in USB 2 to make it work
even better than it did before.
The bulk packets, all of them,
are now 512 bytes instead of the 64
bytes or less that they were previously.
This reduces the overhead
of protocol to data,
so it will run faster.
And then there's also things like the
Niet handshake and the ping protocol.
Previously in USB 1,
if you wanted to send data out to
a device and it couldn't accept it,
the host would go out and data,
and the host would say,
it would receive the data and say, sorry,
I couldn't actually deal with that,
oh well.
And then you'd have to continue
sending all this data until it could,
and this could use up an awful
lot of bandwidth doing nothing.
Now the device can say,
you send the data out,
and the device will say, yes, thank you,
I got that data,
but I don't have any space for any more.
It will say, niet, as a handshake.
Now, niet actually just means not yet,
it has nothing to do with a
Russian word which looks similar.
So in this state,
the host will now not speculatively
send data to the device.
It will instead send pings.
"Ping!
Do you have any space for data?"
And if the device says "Nak", "No
I don't." Or the device will say "Ack,
yes I do." And then you
can carry on sending data.
So you're not constantly using
up bandwidth doing nothing.
Okay, what does it mean to you?
In this case,
if you're a device developer,
if you have a classic speed,
full or low speed device,
and the answer is very little.
If you want to make your device
a USB 2 device for some reason,
all you need to do, usually,
is to change the version number
in the device descriptor.
Instantly, you're a USB 2 device.
However,
You should be sure to
conform to the 1.1 spec,
because you should be sure to
store requests that you don't know.
And in particular,
USB 2 defines a new descriptor,
the device qualifier descriptor.
This is used by the
system to ask the device,
"What can you do if you're
plugged in at the other speed?"
If you're a full-speed device,
you don't support this,
because you don't support high speed.
There is no other speed.
So if the system asks this,
and you gave the wrong reply,
the system may think that, hey,
it's capable of working
at the other speed.
I should tell the user,
plug it into a different port.
It will work better.
The user is confused.
So be sure to store requests
that you don't know about.
You should be doing this already.
Whoever does, we don't know.
Oh, sorry.
Okay, and a slight modification
is that ISOC endpoints now
must use no data by default.
Previously, this was a very good idea
and a common practice,
that in the unconfigured state,
or in the initially configured state,
all the endpoints in an ISOC interface
would have zero bandwidth.
You would then configure it to use
more bandwidth as you go along.
This stops a device which
is actually plugged in,
but idle, taking up bandwidth.
So, the user will plug in a device,
not use it.
Plug in the video camera he wants to use.
He says, "Oh,
there's no bandwidth available."
The other one is using it,
even though the user isn't.
So, be careful with bandwidth,
and in particular,
it's now a specification that you
should not use any bandwidth by default.
There are also some changes to the
low-speed cabling requirements.
If what's written on the slide
actually makes any sense to you,
you should be sure to go
read Chapter 6 of the spec.
In particular,
you should be sure to read the
second half of Chapter 6 in the spec,
because the relevant parts in the
first half don't mention this,
but the ones in the second half do.
Oh, well.
Okay,
what does it mean to device developers?
You have a huge opportunity.
You can make your
device work much faster.
Users like this.
And by much faster,
I mean that transferring,
and say for isochnos
or interrupt devices,
they can now have 24 megabytes a second.
The obvious candidate for
this sort of thing is video.
Video usually uses megabits,
so I should convert to
megabits temporarily.
This gives you 183 megabits a
second to use for your video.
And if you consider that
DV is standard 25 megabits,
you have plenty of space for DV.
Uncompressed DV is 125 megabits.
You can use uncompressed DV.
You can use your imagination as to
what else you want to put in all
this bandwidth that you have to use.
Also, bulk runs much faster now.
20 to 24 megabytes a second is pretty
typical transfer rates for bulk.
So, typically now,
hard drives go a lot faster,
and users are very happy by this.
The transfer rate for bulk is mainly
constrained by the host controller.
So, different host controller
implementations in future may go faster.
We think that 35 to 40 megabytes
a second is not unreasonable
for future controllers.
In fact, I've seen an early
version of one recently,
which actually looks like it could
manage 39 megabytes if I could find
a hard drive fast enough to keep up.
What does it mean to driver developers?
I presume there's a lot of
driver developers out there.
Hopefully, very little.
We're here to make your life easy.
And for most of you,
you should do nothing,
and it will just work.
This is USB.
Once you've got over the fact
that it's running high speed,
if it even is running high speed,
all the rest of the protocols are more
or less the same as they were before,
with the exception of
packet sizes and whatever.
So in general, you should not care
How fast your device is running.
Just transfer the data
as fast as it's going,
and be thankful that
it comes in that fast.
Don't worry about it.
The exception to this, of course,
is ISOC.
If you're doing ISOC,
everything has changed.
All the timings are different.
Now, instead of the one millisecond
frames that you had before,
you have 125 microsecond microframes.
And you put together eight of these,
and you have a good old traditional
frame at one millisecond.
So all your timings now have
to be in terms of microframes,
not frames, if you're doing high speed,
that is, of course.
And in each one of these microframes,
you can transfer up to 3K of data.
That adds up to the 24
megabytes I'd mentioned earlier.
So, how is all this done?
On the bus,
we use a new controller standard,
the enhanced host controller interface.
This is a companion to the
open host controller interface,
which runs full speed and low speed,
as we did previously.
There is support for this in Panther,
a new driver, the EHCI driver.
The EHCI only works with high speed.
As I mentioned,
the speeds are segregated.
There will be more on this later.
So, the EHCI is dealing there solely
with high speed transactions.
It needs something to help it
with the full and low speed.
It actually has companion controllers,
which in our case will
be OHCI controllers,
like you're used to.
And also, how is this done?
You have all these
speeds going on at once,
and they need to be segregated.
The answer is magic hubs.
And there's going to be more,
Rhoaads is going to be telling
you a lot more about those later,
but these are really
complicated beasties.
They've got most of a
host controller in them,
because they have to translate between
high speed and full and low speed.
So, how are you going to do it?
First of all,
you need some hardware which
supports USB 2.0 high speed.
You can either buy one of
our lovely new Macintosh G5s,
or you can get yourself a
PCI card or a PC card and plug
it into your existing hardware.
Then you need some software.
You need the version of the
USB family we have in Panther.
This will enable high speed.
The version number of
the software is now 2.0.
We reserved the number 2.0 a
long time ago so that no one
would ever get confused between
USB spec 2.0 and USB software 2.0.
There's been plenty of that
sort of thing in the past,
and we didn't want to do it.
As you notice,
we've almost run out of version numbers.
We're up to 1.99 already.
So, it's good.
Good job we did it now.
Okay.
When writing your driver,
I suggest that you first of all do
it full speed like you're used to,
and then plug it into a high speed port,
and it will just work,
and you'll be happy.
And like I said, we make it easy for you.
However, if it doesn't work,
this may be where the harsh
introduction to USB 2.0 is.
So, be careful.
Okay.
Tools you might use.
I may have mentioned before that
I think a USB analyzer... ...is a really
useful thing to do USB software with.
And it still is a really useful
thing to do USB software with.
Now,
if you're doing high speed development,
you should really get yourself
a high speed analyzer.
The usual suspects make
high speed analyzers.
Cat C has the advisor.
Catalyst has the SBA20.
Data Transit has the
pod for their machine.
They have pods for every
sort of bus imaginable.
And I'm sure there's more out there,
and I didn't mean to
leave them off the list.
Okay, now I want to tell you a little
bit about high-speed ISOC.
As I mentioned before,
high-speed ISOC is different.
The driver has to know
that it's different.
The device has to know
Say the timings are different.
You have 125 microsecond microframes
instead of the 1 millisecond frames.
And the amount of data you can transfer
in any microframe is increased to 3K.
There is one small wrinkle in this,
is that now the frequency of an
ISOC transaction does not have to be one.
You don't have to do one every microframe
or one every frame as you used to.
You can now specify 2
or 4 or 16 or whatever.
However, we haven't seen any
devices which do this,
so we have not implemented that yet.
If you have one,
we'd love to hear from you.
Okay, having said that high-speed
ISOC is different,
high-speed ISOC is also the same,
in that we recycle the old APIs,
use exactly the same APIs,
we just treat the parameters you
send us a little differently.
As I said, high-speed ISOC is different
from the device's perspective.
The packets on the bus are different,
the timings are different,
you have 125 microsecond microframes.
Here are diagrams of
what the device sees.
If you have a small transaction,
less than 1K, and note you can actually
go up to 1024 bytes,
where you could only
previously go up to 1023,
it's still just in one data zero packet,
like it always used to be.
However, if you need more data
than that in a microframe,
you send multiple packets of a suitable
size to add up to the size that you want.
It will say, if you're sending data out,
the host will say, here's a packet,
there's more to come, by saying data one,
data zero, or data two, data one,
data zero, it will count down like that.
Similarly, if the device wants to send
the host multiple data packets.
If you're 1K or less,
it will just send the single
data packet like it always did.
If it's more than 1K,
you send it in multiple data packets,
the device will say,
there's more to come,
there's more to come, oh, that was it,
and you got one or two extra packets.
That's encoded in the packet
identifiers sent with these.
Interrupt will also allow you
to do 3K of data per microframe.
But it uses the same old data zero,
data one,
alternating PIDs that it always did.
Okay, the high-speed ISOC APIs.
As I said, the APIs used are the same
as they were previously.
The interpretation of some of
the parameters is different.
Here you see a typical
ISOC API read ISOC byte async.
And the first thing to note,
or the things to note are the ones,
the parts highlighted in orange.
And first to note is the frame start.
Now, frame start has not changed,
even if it... Oh, sorry,
I missed something out there.
Whereas previously you had frames,
it's now you should consider these
to be transfer opportunities.
Where an API said frame,
you should interpret that as saying
you now have a transfer opportunity,
whether it's a transfer
opportunity once per millisecond,
or transfer opportunity
once per microframe.
So as I was saying, the frame start,
however, has not changed.
A high-speed ISOC transaction
starts on a frame boundary,
not on a microframe boundary.
Next, the num frames is now the number
of transfers you want to happen.
Either a number of frames for full speed,
or a number of microframes
for high speed.
And finally,
the frame list now specifies the
list of transfers that you want
to happen either in frames or
in microframes for high speed.
and there is also a new API,
Get Framelist Time,
which actually tells you how long
your transfer opportunity lasts,
either 125 microseconds
or 1,000 microseconds,
so you know what the timing should be,
or in effect,
whether you're running full speed or
whether you're running high speed.
Okay?
So, in summary, USB 2 is USB,
but it will run faster
if it's high speed,
if there's a high speed host,
and if there's a high speed device.
But most of the time,
it looks just like the
USB you always knew and loved.
As I say, USB 2.0 is just like full speed
if you're not a high speed device.
And don't worry about the
speed if you do not have to.
Just transfer the data
and don't worry about it.
You do need to worry about the
speed if you're doing ISOC there.
And the high-speed
ISOC APIs are different.
We use the same APIs, but we reinterpret
some of the parameters.
And with that,
I shall turn it over to Rhoaads.
Thank you very much, Barry.
Okay, I'm going to talk a little
bit about USB 2.0 hubs.
The USB Implementers Forum worked very
hard to make sure that USB devices just
worked no matter whether you were on
an old USB 1.1 bus or on a USB 2.0 bus.
And as Barry said, however,
the data traffic is actually segregated.
You do not have full speed and low speed
data on the same wire as high speed.
[Transcript missing]
Now most of this is transparent to
driver writers because the drivers
don't really care too much about
which kind of host they're on.
The exception would be the hub drivers,
which do need to know whether the
hub is attached to a high speed
bus running in high speed mode,
or to a full speed bus
running in full speed mode.
Luckily Apple produces the
hub driver for Mac OS X,
and so you wouldn't necessarily
need to worry about that.
Now, having this magic hub can cause some
problems if it's not configured properly.
For example,
you may have a high-speed hub,
and if you plug it into the
root hub of your computer,
it runs in high-speed mode.
If, however,
you plug it into a keyboard hub or
a display hub that is a 1.1 hub,
your high-speed hub has now
become a full-speed hub.
And this can cause some confusion if you
have high-speed devices attached to it,
and you want them to
work in high-speed mode.
Because once a hub is running in
full-speed mode or low-speed mode,
well, full-speed mode,
then all downstream devices of
that hub have now become full-
or low-speed mode devices.
Now the segregation that happens between
the high speed bus and full speed and low
speed devices happens in something inside
the hub called a transaction translator.
Now these transaction translators,
there is at least one of
these in every high speed hub.
And in most high speed hubs that
I've seen on the market today,
there is exactly one
transaction translator.
However, it's possible to have a
transaction translator on
every port of a high speed hub.
And this produces a
much more complex hub,
but at the same time
allows some benefits.
You can have one full speed
controller's worth of bandwidth for
isochronous and interrupt endpoints
on each transaction translator.
Which means if you have one transaction
translator in a high speed hub,
you have one full speed
[Transcript missing]
So multi-TT hubs can have
more full-speed ISOC devices,
for example, attached than a single
TT hub would be able to have.
Again, the root hub, being special,
does not use transaction
translators at all.
What happens is when you plug in a
full-speed device to a root hub port,
the high-speed controller sees
that it's a full-speed device and
electrically disconnects itself from
the port and passes the connection
over to the companion controller,
and that device is now
running on an OHCI controller.
These transaction translators in the hub
are therefore store and forward units
for what are called split transactions.
Now, a split transaction essentially
is a transaction where when the
host wants to talk to a full-speed
device or a low-speed device,
it transfers information to
the hub to which that device
is attached in high-speed mode.
The hub stores that information,
buffers it up,
and then transfers the information to or
from the full-speed or low-speed device,
separate from any activity
happening on the high-speed bus.
This transfer occurs in two parts
called start split and complete split.
And in between a start
split and a complete split,
which is the information going
to and from the high-speed hub,
there can be more high-speed activity
happening while the hub is doing
full-speed or low-speed communication
with the downstream device.
Now, this works very nicely.
And allows you to plug in
devices into a hub without really
paying much attention to it,
but it can have some
significant performance issues.
And you probably should
be aware of these.
Here.
So here's, let me show you graphically
why that occurs,
why you can have some performance issues.
Let's say that I have a host,
and I have a full speed hard drive
attached to a high speed hub.
And the host needs to send out a
data packet to this hard drive,
and it's an out packet from
the host to the hard drive.
So what happens is first the host
sends a start split command to the hub,
saying I have a packet,
a data out packet destined
for this hard drive.
It sends the out PID to specify
that it is an out packet.
Sends the data,
a 64 byte data packet for example,
and receives an acknowledgement
from the high speed hub that that
data was successfully received.
However, that acknowledgement is that
it was received by the hub,
not that it was received by the device.
Then the host and the hub,
or the host and other high speed
devices can continue to talk.
So the host sends the
data packet to the device,
while the hub starts its
transfer to the device itself.
So it sends the same
out PID to the device.
It sends the 64 byte
packet to the device,
which takes significantly
longer at this point.
And it receives an acknowledgement
from the device that everything
was received successfully.
Now the hub remembers that
acknowledgement and says,
okay,
at some point the host is going to ask me
whether the device got the data or not.
So when the host is able to do so,
it sends a complete split to the device.
So the host sends the
data packet to the device,
and then the hub is able to then
acknowledge that transaction.
So that completes what used to be an
old fashioned out data ACK packet,
but it takes a little bit longer.
The time between when the full-speed
device acknowledges the receipt
of the data and the beginning of
the complete split transaction can
depend on what other activity is
happening on the high-speed bus.
And because of this,
it causes some significant delay in,
or can cause significant
delay in this data.
And the upshot of this is
that a full-speed hard drive,
for example,
attached to a high-speed hub can end up
functioning to the point where the actual
throughput to the drive is half what it
is if it's attached to a full-speed bus.
Now, some hubs, as I mentioned earlier,
high speed hubs, have a single TT and
some have multiple TTs.
And as I mentioned,
each transaction translator
essentially is a full speed bus.
So this is especially important
for people doing ISOC work
with these hubs because,
let's take for an example,
if you have a camera that transfers
980 bytes per millisecond frame,
it's a full speed camera.
Well,
if you have two of these cameras and
you try to plug them into two ports of
a single transaction translator hub,
only one of the cameras is going to work
because that's going to saturate the full
speed bandwidth available to that hub.
If the hub has multi TTs and you
plug a camera into each of two ports,
each port has its own full
speed isochronous bandwidth
and both cameras can work.
A more likely example might be a
camera with a microphone for input
and a pair of USB speakers for output,
all of which use isochronous bandwidth.
And so with a single TT hub,
you may have a difficult time or have
reduced quality of your video input or
output because you're trying to share
the bandwidth amongst all the devices,
whereas with a multi TT hub,
you'd be able to plug both the
camera and the speakers into two
separate ports and they and they
each have their own bandwidth,
so it's fine.
Multi TT hubs also allow for better
throughput with bulk devices as well.
Now, I have mentioned before that the
root hub is different because we
have these companion controllers,
so there's no need for the
transaction translator.
Again, the EHCI driver,
if it exists in the system,
determines that, oh,
this is a full-speed device,
I need to switch it over to
the companion controller,
and it disconnects itself
from that particular port.
So, no split transactions are necessary.
What ends up happening is you
have a completely separate
and the O-H-C-I controller
running your full speed,
low speed devices,
and you get the same performance
as you do today on a full
speed O-H-C-I controller.
So in summary,
split transactions allow for a seamless
transition from USB 1.1 to USB 2.0.
Your full speed,
low speed devices just work.
You plug them into a hub
and everything works great.
However, you can end up with some
performance issues which you
might want to be aware of.
And any performance critical full
speed devices may want to consider
Somehow telling the user to
put the device on an OHCI bus.
One way to do this, for example,
would be let's say you have
two EHCI ports on a computer,
or three or four from
a PCI card or whatnot.
You might plug a high speed hub into
one port and a full speed hub into
another port and have all the high
speed devices living on the high
speed hub and all the full speed
devices living on the full speed hub.
Because a full speed hub will provide
data transfer on the full speed OHCI bus,
and a high speed hub will provide
these transfers on the high speed bus.
So with that, I'm going to turn it
over to Fernando Urbina,
and he's going to talk
about the new APIs.
Thank you, Mr.
Rhodes.
We're going to leave USB 2.0 aside
for a little bit now and talk about
what we've been doing since the
last time we've met with respect
to adding APIs to our family.
We've added both kernel
and IOUSB library updates,
and on request from multiple developers,
we finally have a way to get the
version number of the family and the
USB library programmatically instead
of having to go by hand to get the
CFBundle version and all that stuff.
So that is available to you.
We did add, like Barry mentioned,
a couple of USB 2.0 related APIs.
One is to get the frame list time,
whether it's 125 microseconds
or 1,000 microseconds.
And the other one is to get
the bus microframe number.
And actually,
this 64-bit value encodes both the
frame number and the microframe number
at the time that the call is made.
And just like the regular bus
frame... So you get bus frame number.
It is time stamped so that you can know
when we exactly got that frame number.
One request that we've had
for a long time as well was
to have a more straightforward
API to recover from a stall.
Presently, when you get a stall,
you have to clear the data toggle both
on the controller and on that device,
and this involves having to
issue a device request to your
device with a set feature,
endpoint halt, blah, blah, blah, blah,
blah.
Now you have this clear pipe stall
both ends that will do that for you,
and so that will make your life easier.
We also augmented the isochronous
APIs to help you and us
manage the bandwidth better.
One of the big differences, however,
since we introduced this API,
is that when you create an interface,
which in turn creates the pipe
objects for your endpoints,
previously we would fail that
call if there was not enough
bandwidth to create the pipes.
With these new APIs,
we will now create the pipes even
if there is not enough bandwidth.
And so your pipes will actually have
zero bandwidth allocated to them,
so you have to be able to
Realize this and do something appropriate
like allocating bandwidth for them.
These are the new APIs.
The first two,
the GetBandwidthAvailable and
the GetEndpointProperties,
are unique in the sense that you
don't have to have the USB interface
open in order to make these calls.
BandwidthAvailable is
pretty straightforward.
It just tells you how many
bytes are available in the bus.
The GetEndpointProperties will allow you
to inquire of the different alternate
settings of a particular interface to
see how much bandwidth they would use.
So typically you would get
the bandwidth available,
iterate through all
your alternate settings,
pick one that has a lower
amount of bandwidth,
and then call SetAlternateInterface,
and this call is not really new,
it's just here for completeness.
To create that interface and
allocate the pipe objects,
then, very importantly,
you should call GetPipeProperties
on that isochronous endpoint,
or isochronous pipe object,
and make sure that the max packet
size for that endpoint is not zero.
If it is zero,
it meant that even though we
had told you that there was
bandwidth available earlier,
somebody might have come in and
grabbed that bandwidth away from you,
and it's not going to be zero.
And it's not there anymore.
So you should really make sure that
once your pipes are created once again,
there is enough bandwidth for them.
Finally,
we're back to par with our Mac OS 9
implementation in the sense that
we have a set by policy API.
And this essentially allows you to
return bandwidth to the system if
you know that you're never going to
use the amount of bandwidth that was
specified in the alternate settings.
The granularity of the alternate
settings in an interface depends on
the whim of the device manufacturer.
And you might know that you're not
going to use all that because there's
never going to be a case where the
device is going to send that data.
So be a good citizen and
call set by policy and return
that bandwidth back to us.
For 10.2.3, we added some new APIs that
I'm going to talk about now.
These were trying to solve what
I call the latency problem.
What is the latency?
Most of you are probably
aware that on Mac OS X,
the time between when the hardware
transaction completes on the bus
and your callback is called varies.
Sometimes it comes right away,
but sometimes it can be delayed
for 80 milliseconds or more.
The callback happens
on the IOUSB work loop,
and there are other threads that run at
a higher priority than that work loop,
and if they're doing work,
your callback will be delayed.
This presents a problem in some cases,
but you can work around it like you
have done in Mac OS 9 and in previous
versions by keeping the ISOC endpoint
busy and having multiple transactions,
so that even if your callback is delayed,
it doesn't matter because you have
already scheduled a transaction to start
prior to your callback being called.
So that's great and that
works very well in most cases.
However, sometimes there is a problem.
[Transcript missing]
So, we thought about it,
and we came with the following solution.
We realized that this being USB,
and isochronous USB especially,
the data from the device was in
the user's buffer as soon as the
USB controller completed that frame.
However, we lacked one critical piece of
information that was not in the buffer.
In fact, it's in the USB controller,
and that is how many bytes
were actually transferred.
Isochronous data varies in the amount,
even though you ask for
a certain amount of data,
it can transfer more or less.
And so you need to actually
know how much data was there.
However, realizing this,
we knew that then the client could go and
peek into the buffer that they gave us
and get that data at the expected time,
if only they had the appropriate
number of bytes that were
transferred in that frame.
So we augmented the frameless
structure to actually have a timestamp.
We decided to update the actual number,
what is called the FR actual count,
at primary interrupt time.
Now doing processing at primary
interrupt time is sort of dicey
because you are preventing any other
thread from running at that time.
So we really have to do some
minimal processing at that time,
and what we do is we look
through our structures,
get the number of bytes
from the controller,
update the frame list, and get out.
Your callback will still happen at the
same time that it's happened in the past.
However, since you know when the
data was going to be there,
you can go and look at your data buffer
and at your frame list buffer and know
how many bytes were actually transferred.
So there are four new calls for
these load latency transfers.
The first two are just
for user-lent drivers,
and the last two are the read and write
APIs for both user and kernel drivers.
We thought it was a good idea to have
the IOUSB library manage your buffers.
So you have, as a client in user space,
you have to call in and
give us the information for
how big to make the buffer,
essentially.
You don't have to have just one
whole buffer for your whole data.
You can have multiple buffers
for each transfer if you want.
You can manage that yourself.
However,
when you do finish the transfers,
you need to call us back so we can
release our buffers and we can inform
the kernel entities that those memory
descriptors are no longer being used.
Again, a typical API for the low
latency read ISOC is as follows.
You can see in the highlight
there that there are two changes.
One is we have added this
update frequency parameter.
That tells us how often you want your
If you wanted to be updated,
of course the granularity
is one millisecond.
If you wanted it to be
updated every millisecond,
you would pass in a one.
If you wanted it every
eight milliseconds,
you would pass in an eight.
If you have a 64 frame transfer,
and you're only going to be looking
at it from user space or from kernel
space every eight milliseconds,
you should really pass
an eight and not a one.
Because, again,
we're taking processing time
at filter interrupt time,
and that is preventing any
other threads from running on
that processor at that time.
The low latency ISOC frame list now has,
as I mentioned earlier,
an absolute time parameter
that is timestamp at the time
that we process the data,
that we updated your number
of bytes transferred.
If we are updating more
than one frame at that time,
all those frames are going
to have the same timestamp.
This is used by the audio drivers,
for example, to synchronize all their
stuff and do their magic.
These APIs are detailed on HeaderDoc.
If you have any questions,
feel free to ask them on the USB list,
and we'll answer them as soon as we can.
And again,
don't abuse the low latency APIs.
I can't stress that.
We got some pushback from the kernel
guys when we were adding these APIs,
because they don't want anything
to happen at filter interrupt time.
And if you abuse it,
then performance for the whole
system is going to go down.
Just a quick note on the
USB Implementers Forum.
One of the big things going on right
now is that a video device class
specification is nearing release.
In fact, I think this week it's going
to the 30-day comment period,
at the end of which it will become a
1.0 specification and will be released.
You should go to the
Implementers website.
It's public for now,
and take a look at it.
It provides support for a
wide range of video devices,
everything that, you know,
video related that you can think of.
All sorts of different payloads.
We plan to provide a class
driver for some of those devices.
I am the one working on it.
The specification, as I mentioned,
is all-encompassing.
It does not specify whether you need
to be a high-speed device or not.
Of course,
for some of the payload formats, like DV,
it does not make sense.
It cannot work on a full-speed device.
Some chipsets right now
only do bulk transfers,
and there is support for
just bulk transfer for video.
Of course,
you have the pros and cons about that.
There's still image support.
It's not limited to
receiving video on the host.
It also has support for
sending video out to a device.
There's plenty of manufacturers
on the working group that are
Gearing up to produce these devices,
so there's something exciting that
we're going to see in the near future.
Another change from the implementers
forum is that they've now defined an
interface association descriptor as
a change notice to the USB 2.0 spec.
And all this does is allows classes like
the audio class and the video class,
for which this descriptor
is now mandatory,
to relate different
interfaces to each other.
So that the system will know
that when you change something
on the control interface,
it also needs something to
happen to a streaming interface.
We are looking at the ramifications
of this and expect to support
this descriptor in the future.
A quick debugging tools update.
This year we gave up on giving a
demo on tool machine debugging.
It didn't work for the last two years.
We decided, you know,
we'll save face this time.
We do provide login versions of
the IOUSBFamily on the website,
on our website in developer.apple.com.
The latest versions actually
I produced so that you can install
as a package the shipping version
as well as the login version so that
you don't have to save the other
one aside and copy it over later.
A quick caveat,
if you do try to download the sources
and build your own IOUSBFamily,
do not try to boot with an
unstripped version of the USBFamily.
And actually when you use
Project Builder and build the project
using the development build style,
it will not strip the binary and
you will get an unhappy Mac or
whatever the equivalent is now.
And you won't boot and you'll
need another partition to boot it.
Caveat emptor.
So, this is the new tools.
It seems to change with every
release of Project Builder.
This is for the December 2002
developer tools.
This is a line that you use to
produce an unstripped version.
It's simpler now.
I have no idea what it is or if this
will work with Xcode or... but...
For the December tools, use this.
Of course, if you're going to do
machine to machine debugging,
you have to change your default boot
arguments to what's on the screen so
that you can actually connect to it.
If you don't, you'll just get the
multilingual panic message.
Finally, actually in solving some bugs,
I was able to use the CHOD tools,
which stands for Computer Hardware
Understanding Developer Tools.
There is actually a session tomorrow,
and it was very handy,
and actually you wouldn't
think that get bus frame number
could lock out your machine.
Just a tiny bit of administrivia.
The repository,
as most of you who accessed
it before now know,
is not live anymore.
However, we are still open source.
Once Panther is released,
we are going to release the
EHCI driver for the EHCI controller.
You've noticed that things,
releases are better now,
and very soon after
an update is released,
the tarballs with all the
sources are released on the web,
so I still encourage you to
go and build it if you need to
build a family to debug things.
So this is just a brief summary
of the APIs that we've changed.
Again, if you have any suggestions for
new APIs that would make your life
easier for some reason or another,
we're always on the list.
You know who we are.
Just send us some email,
and the only way we're going to
consider them is if we know about them.
So feel free to suggest that.
We're looking forward
to the video class spec,
and the repository is not live anymore,
but we are, and we're still working,
and we're enjoying ourselves.
These references are pretty
much unchanged from last year,
even though some of the
documents have been updated.
It's the usual suspects.
There are technical notes
on debugging kernel panics,
if you feel like doing
that for some reason.
We still get for persons just coming
to develop on "my driver doesn't
load." I have that bookmark and
always fire it out on the list.
Again, some sessions that you
might want to attend.
Just use your time transport and
go to Godfrey's session yesterday.
As an aside, of course,
this is for the DVD, blah, blah, blah.
There's, as I mentioned,
the shot performance
optimization session tomorrow.
Of course,
we are expecting you guys to come to
the feedback forum tomorrow as well,
and give us, you know, let us have it.
Finally on Friday,
we have a session on the Hit Manager and
our forest feedback support.
So if you want to listen to me again,
bookmark your Friday morning session.
and you know our email addresses.
Again, the USB list at list.apple.com.
I also monitored one or
several of the Dartwin lists,
and the first thing I say when
somebody posts a USB question there is,
go ahead and join the USB list,
and your question will be
answered faster that way.